##  Chotki data model and protocol

Chotki is a CRDT based replicated database. Chotki has no master
server and no consensus algo. All Chotki objects consist of
fields, and fields are CRDTs. That means, any edits to any field
are mergeable. `git` is a good analogy here: merging, no master!

One change to one field is called an *op*. An op is emitted by a
*source*, which is a writeable *replica*. A bunch of ops emitted
and processed atomically is called a *packet*.

The key to understanding Chotki is its use of 64-bit identifiers
able to reference any replica, object, field, op or packet in
the system. Chotki id bit layout, m.s.b. to l.s.b.:

 1. source aka `src`, 20 bits, the id of the replica,
 2. sequence number aka `seq`, 32 bits, all replica's packets
    are numbered sequentially,
 3. offset aka `off` is either the op's 12-bit offset in a
    packet or, if we address within an object, the "offset" of a
    field contains:
     1. field number (1, 2, 3...) of 7 bits and
     2. field type ('C', 'S'...) of 5 bits.

Ids are serialized in hex, like `8e-82f0-32` (src-seq-off).
    
Each op has its *own* 64-bit id as well as a *reference* to the
location it is being applied to (which is also a 64-bit id).
References are very essential and powerful building blocks of
CRDTs. They allow for very precise and fully deterministic
application of changes in the data graph. No ids - no CRDTs.
While a typical CRDT architecture employs Lamport timestamps for
ids, Chotki ids are a bit cheaper than that. Their only function
is addressing, they have no logical-timestamp or monotony
properties. CRDTs that depend on logical time implement it on
their own.

Note the difference with all the classic databases, like
PostgreSQL or LevelDB or MySQL or you-name-it. They all use
plain sequential numbering to refer to a transaction, as they
are NOT distributed. They use one linear op log. Distributed
systems, like Cassandra, often use UUIDs for identifiers and
also timestamps for conflict resolution. That allows the use of
per-replica op logs with no order guarantees whatsoever. The
nice term for that is *eventual consistency*. Chotki maintains
**causal consistency** and that allows for useful same-source
sequential numbering. Replica op logs are *partially ordered* --
that is a formal term! Chotki replica sync protocol relies on
that rather heavily. Chotki *can* survive a breakdown of the
causal order, although that would not be an efficient mode of
operation.

##  Serialization and the protocol

Chotki employs a very simple TLV protocol called ToyTLV: each
record is prepended with its type `[A-Z]` and length (1 or 4
bytes). A record's body can contain nested records.

Each op has *id* and *ref* (both are 64-bit ids). Ops are always
shipped in packets. There is some number of optimizations to
abbreviate the metadata (ids, refs).

Packets may have different internal structure. They can be:

 1. new object creation packets (an op per a field),
 2. multiple-object edit packets (an op per field change),
 3. object state snapshots (may have zero or many ops per a
    field),
 4. diffs / changesets. 

All the particular packet layouts are better seen in the code.

A replica-to-replica sync session starts with a
 1. handshake, followed by
 2. data re-sync followed by
 3. real-time sync mode when changes get sent once they happen,
    all that finally concluded by a
 4. "bye" message.

Handshake format: `H{I? V{v*} .*}`, namely

 1. TLV `H` record with nested records:
     1. Replica event id `I`.
     2. Version vector `V`.
     3. Maybe other records.
 
Sync phase is a stream of primary packets, object creations and
edits: `O{I (R.)*}`, `E{I (R.)*}`

The "bye" message only lists the reason for disconnection:
`B{$1}`.
